Medical Eros:
Caregivers, Loss, and
an Ethics of Waiting
David B. Morris
Doctors tend to have a fierce commitment to the rational. . . . If
there is a credo in practical medicine, it is that the important thing
is to be sensible.
—Atul Gawande1
Medical eros is the unfamiliar or invisible complement—and sometimes
the outright antagonist—of the familiar evidence-based biomedical
powers that gather, unofficially, under the sign of medical logos. The
distinction between medical eros and medical logos, however unusual
the terms, can prove useful in clarifying an ambiguous contemporary
landscape where biomedicine with its sensible practices and rational
procedures still rules supreme in its institutional settings—hospitals,
laboratories, health systems, clinics, and grant agencies—despite sometimes
effective, sustained challenges from competitors ranging from
the biopsychosocial model, alternative and complementary medicine,
integrative medicine, mind/body medicine, narrative medicine, holistic
health, and cognitive-behavioral therapies all the way to local revivals
of Ayurveda, herbal medicine, and shamanism. In its vast institutional
power, biomedicine seems capable of absorbing almost any challenge
so long as the challenger meets its standards of evidence and reason.
In this sense, biomedicine represents less a monolithic or coherent
philosophy than an attractive force that, like a massive health magnet,
gathers together under the unseen sign of medical logos whatever
practices it validates as rational, sensible, and securely evidence-based.
Medical logos, in short, is biomedicine as practiced institutionally in the
developed world with its amazing drugs, surgeries, gene therapies, and
computerized diagnostic tools.
250 Medical Eros: Caregivers, Loss, and an Ethics of Waiting
“A threshold has been crossed,” writes Nikolas Rose, Director of
the BIOS Centre for the Study of Bioscience, Biomedicine, Biotechnology
and Society at the London School of Economics and Political Science.
The crucial change that Rose sees as rippling from biomedicine across
all aspects of society is what he calls “a molecular vision of life.”2
Medical logos is the institutional practice of a molecular vision of life,
inseparable now from biochemistry and biotechnology, whose combined
power gives medicine a prominence over human affairs comparable only
to theology in the Middle Ages. Yet all is not well. The daily practice
of medicine is also beset by demands from government bureaucracies,
insurance carriers, administrators, attorneys, and multinational drug
companies, to name only a few. As a group, physicians experience
high rates of burnout, alcoholism, and suicide, with the highest risk
of suicide awaiting women physicians.3 Patients in turn often complain
about uncaring doctors. “Wherever I lectured,” writes surgeon Lori
Arviso Alvord, “people would come up to me afterward and tell me
stories of their impersonal treatment by doctors, of problems getting
appropriate treatment through managed care programs, and of doctors
or hospital staff who had treated them insensitively. They felt
powerless, often miserable inside hospitals, stripped of their dignity.”4
Such complaints arise from diverse sources, but they emerge within a
landscape long defined by the triumph of medical logos. Medical eros,
in its complementary rather than antagonistic role, offers a resource
that might help restore a long-lost balance.
Medical eros places much the same value on emotion that medical
logos places on reason. Researchers in cognitive neuroscience have
emphasized how feelings and reasoning interpenetrate, and the contrast
between medical eros and medical logos is meant to subvert rather than
to maintain an outmoded binary opposition.5 It hardly counts as a valid
criticism that biomedicine finds little or no place for whatever it deems
non-sensical, irrational, or unsupported by substantial evidence. Most
patients would applaud. What concerns me here, however, is exactly
what medical logos leaves out: not only the blind spots, loopholes, and
paradoxes implicit in a molecular gaze but also the broadly emotional
powers (with a significant impact on human well being) that rank
under the general sign of medical eros. Medical eros regularly ignores
or transgresses the boundaries that logic, reason, and sensible practice
establish, but in so doing it identifies an adjacent threshold that the
molecular gaze ordinarily fails to acknowledge. Together—with the
caution needed for patient safety—medical logos and medical eros offer
a fuller vision of human lives in illness and in health.
David B. Morris 251
The Argument: On Losing Control
Everything changed—that is, it changed in my life—with the
blessing of the candles. Something awful was going on. After months
of untethered suspicion, as dishes turned up in random cabinets and
trivialities like a lost exercise rope triggered meltdown rages, I couldn’t
any longer take refuge in excuses. The secular Jewish family I married
into blessed the candles only on Passover, and the traditional prayer
always fell to my wife, Ruth. With the grace of a natural-born dancer
fully blossomed into her fifties, flanked by family and by our closest
friends, she stretched her hands above the lighted candles—eyes closed,
palms down, elbows raised—ready to intone the customary Hebrew
words, softy, slowly, as she had done since childhood. Barukh Ata
Adonai, Eloheinu Melekh Ha-olam. . . . Ruth’s almost trancelike state as
she re-entered this ritual space visibly softened the edge that served
her well as a mid-level administrator and corporate crisis manager,
as if the ancient blessing drew her into a deeper order of time and
being. After twenty-five Sedarim together, I knew the sounds and
rhythms (in a language I don’t understand) almost as well as I knew
the hymns I had sung as a child. I always felt a reassuring warmth
as Ruth sang the annual blessing. It seemed to affirm a pre-verbal
bond that connected us in a closeness that friends marveled at, much
as touches, sighs, and glances count for far more, among lovers, than
words and meanings.
On this night, now forever different from all other nights, with
Ruth’s hands floating palms down above the white tapers, her face
serene and her skin glowing in the candlelight, I turn stone cold as
she stumbles over the opening phrases. Impossible! She can’t remember
the prayer? I’m repeating the familiar Hebrew syllables in my head as
if to jog her memory. But this, I sense, is no normal forgetting. I’ve
read enough neuroscience to suspect that you don’t ordinarily forget
patterns so deep. There must be severe damage, powerful synaptic
disorder, although I had no idea about the nightmare ahead.
I want to explore—beginning with that awful night and with the
journey it initiated—what, from a medical point of view, is an unreasonable
and entirely counter-intuitive position: that doctors and patients
might do well to consider and even embrace the role of eros. Eros,
as the ancient Greek god of sexuality and love, however, would seem
to have no place in contemporary evidence-based medicine. Medicine
tends to flee the erotic, with good reason. As a mythic figure representing
passion and irrational desire, eros is the natural-born enemy